Blog: ClickHouse vs BigQuery (#5704)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/clickhouse-vs-bigquery.md

## Architecture

### BigQuery’s Architecture

BigQuery’s serverless architecture was novel at the time of its 2010 debut. Every BigQuery instance has variable storage units (distributed replicas) connected to variable compute units (calling slots); as an instance’s demands grow, so does its utilization of the storage and compute slots. Even today, this approach stands out — most databases parallelize compute, but not storage. 

![BigQuery Architecture.png](../images/blog/clickhouse-vs-bigquery/bigquery-architecture.png)

BigQuery extends many Google projects to make this happen. Specifically, BigQuery uses Colossus, Google’s file storage system; Borg, Google’s job scheduler; Dremel, a multi-tenant cluster that executes the queries; and Jupiter, Google’s pentabit network. BigQuery works because Google has a massive general-purpose infrastructure designed for isolated storage and compute.

![Google Infra.png](../images/blog/clickhouse-vs-bigquery/google-infra.png)

> Amid being built on titanic infrastructure, BigQuery usually returns results in the order of _seconds_, not _milliseconds_, because it focuses on scalability, not per-query performance. 

Author: This is a good question. Shall follow-up with Mat.

### ClickHouse’s (Traditional) Architecture

ClickHouse utilizes a shared-nothing architecture where CPU, Storage, and Memory are stored in a single, beefy machine. While ClickHouse *does* support sharding databases across many physical instances managed under Apache Zookeeper, its fundamental design is monolithic. When you use ClickHouse (traditionally), everything is happening in the same place. 

![Shared Nothing Architecture.png](../images/blog/clickhouse-vs-bigquery/shared-nothing-architecture.png)

> Accordingly, ClickHouse can scale in all three dimensions (storage, memory, and compute) by simply upgrading the machine. However, scaling is still tedious — new storage and compute cannot be added on a whim to the same instance; instead, a new instance needs to be provisioned and data needs to be migrated from one to another. 

Reviewer: Not exactly true. You can always add storage to CH by adding disks to the instance https://altinity.com/blog/2019/11/27/amplifying-clickhouse-capacity-with-multi-volume-storage-part-1

definitely not as elegant as bigquery's solution though

> Accordingly, ClickHouse can scale in all three dimensions (storage, memory, and compute) by simply upgrading the machine. However, scaling is still tedious — new storage and compute cannot be added on a whim to the same instance; instead, a new instance needs to be provisioned and data needs to be migrated from one to another. 

Author: ```suggestion
Accordingly, ClickHouse can scale in all three dimensions (storage, memory, and compute) by simply upgrading the machine. However, scaling isn't as straightforward compared to BigQuery — compute cannot be added on a whim to the same instance, though you can add additional disks to an instance to scale capacity.
```

The performance difference between BigQuery and ClickHouse can be immense. BigQuery can take dozens of seconds to execute a query. ClickHouse, if tuned correctly, can execute the same query on *terabytes* of data with sub-second performance. 

The **"tuned”** bit is important — ClickHouse gives developers tooling to expedite expected queries. While BigQuery does some standard optimizations, like columnar storage (which we discuss in more detail in our [ClickHouse and Postgres comparison](/blog/clickhouse-vs-postgres)), ClickHouse goes further. In particular, ClickHouse accomplishes its “fighter jet” speeds by leveraging four techniques:

1. Granulated storage
2. Materialized views
3. Specialized engines
4. Vectorized query execution.

### Granulated Storage

Most databases store data indexed via primary keys. When searching for that data, such as a specific column, a typical database scans all data and return the result. This is sloooow. 

> ClickHouse achieves a magnificent speed boost by using granulated storage. Each ClickHouse table has a primary key defined as a tuple of multiple columns. Data is then sorted by those columns, first by the first entry, then by the second, and onwards. Afterwards, sorted entries are broken into granules, which are fixed length mini-tables, by default 8192 entries long. ClickHouse’s big advancement is that it exclusively saves just the **first** entry to each granule. 

Reviewer: This would be a great spot to talk about how CH uses [Log Structured Merge Trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Log-structured_merge-tree) (LSMT) to store data. This + the Granules makes CH very fast

This is one of the useful features we leverage extensively at PostHog – watch our **[video on them](https://youtu.be/6IwLWEx_mg4?t=804)** if you're curious.

### Vectorized Query Execution

Vectorized query execution allows ClickHouse to use SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data), which parallelize data aggregation of multiple memory values with a single instruction. This massively boosts computation. 

While BigQuery doesn’t support vectorized query execution, Google does [offer it](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bi-engine-query) through BI Engine, a separate GCP product that integrates with BigQuery. 

## Why ClickHouse is often integrated with BigQuery

ClickHouse and BigQuery are often used together, evidenced by ClickHouse’s [own blog post](https://clickhouse.com/blog/clickhouse-bigquery-migrating-data-for-realtime-queries) on the topic. In general, for GCP users, BigQuery offers an easy, consolidated place to analyze data given its easy integration with other GCP data products. 

> However, a tuned ClickHouse instance is faster. If analytical queries need to be returned to a customer without noticeable delays, ClickHouse is likely the better solution. It’s also probably cheaper, as BigQuery charges users per scan or requires pre-purchased slots, which quickly grows expensive – it’s exactly why [HIFI switched to ClickHouse](https://clickhouse.com/blog/hifis-migration-from-bigquery-to-clickhouse), for example.  

Reviewer 2: Any insight on the pricing differences between the two?

Reviewer 2: It is a bit of an apples to oranges comparison, but could mention it:
1. https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/pricing
2. https://clickhouse.com/pricing

Author: I think best to leave it. It's hard to compare + liable to change, dating the article.

Reviewer 2: Fair point
